Thank you very much, everyone. Mahi Dalits. Again, welcome, everyone. Again, to be again.
Together, we are going to wrap a letter, a teaching of the hour, a gracious, oh, grando, grando,
gracious teacher of the bodhasha javan. And so thank you very much also for participating
and welcome everyone. Okay, thank you. And then also, we will follow the light, the light
or torch of the hour to have the new teaching and which is so concise and so precise and
which continue going on these teachings. The heart advised for the fortunate ones. Truly
we are all almost in the ones. And His Holiness, Ochabjidunu, which is giving us this beautiful
instructions and wires so that we can touch and keep in our heart and cherish and glorify
our teaching of the practices, what we receive, what we learn. So glorify them. And that is
wonderful. And for those reasons, again, the brain or visual motivations such as your appreciation
and as well as vastness, the motivation of the both each other for all living beings and
the purity, motivation or the teaching of the very other teachings and trying to activate
all those beautiful qualities. And then we go in the teaching, teaching itself. And the
teaching itself, I'm going to again summarize this, I'm going to talk many other things,
so I'll talk while we go to the point. As we discuss it all, this practice, when I really
come to the practices, it's so important to put these three frames. The beginning good,
middle good, and concluding good. And sometimes I use the terminology, beginning noble, middle
noble, and the continuing noble. And whatever the terminology is, it is noble, it is good,
it is excellent, not just for only ourself, but all the living beings. It's good now,
it's good forever. Ever, it is really excellent. And therefore, again, that is the frame. In
that frame, again, we went on this first one is the motivation. And if I clearly kind of
understand the reflecting of the poor training of the mind, and then also kind of close the
feeling to the Buddha Dhamma Sangha and extending and rising up the enlightened mind or the
body, together with the devotions. Devotion is the topping, or there is the cream of the practices
that we are, it's all best on the beautiful motivation. And the devotion is joy, devotion
is appreciation, devotion is faith, the preciousness. Preciousness of our self, preciousness of the
lineage, precious all the satisfaction. And also devotion has some determinations that I'm going
use this all precious opportunity to make some even more precious for me and for all the things.
Those are really known. With that, then we go to the principle noble, middle noble, or middle good,
and which is according to bodhicitta level, as I say, kind of use the frame, actualizing both each
other. So that is actualizing bodhicitta. And that actualizing bodhicitta is summarized into six
paravatas practices. Six paravatas practices. Actualizing bodhicitta is absolutely best upon
the reaching bodhicitta. That means actualizing bodhicitta is absolutely best upon poor, boundless,
and the lonely practices. The only practice I'm using that terminology in the Western, that is
quite popular name. Everybody, almost everybody knows that name. The way the Buddhist practitioners
I think knows, means equalizing. It only has three different signs. Equalizing, that means all
living
beings are equal. And we went those kind of meanings. There will be details, I'm sure you
remember, and you already know that those things. And the second is then tungli, which is the
English
translation, exchanging, exchanging. And third one is others are more important than one
own self. Those all three are, I'm using as tungli practice, which is best upon, again,
these four bones, so we can move each other. We knew that is strong. Now we're going to actualize
physically, verbally, that intuition. That means into practice. We're going to put that into
practice.
Now, surely we're going to. And that is then six paramata practices. Six paramata practices. That
actualizes. And that is then, those six paramatas are generous paramata, morality paramata,
patience paramata, and your effort paramata, concentration paramata, and wisdom paramatas.
Those are known as the sixth paramata practices that, of course, we all know that. I'm talking
this not just so that you don't know. I'm just talking as to what we went through. In that sense,
I'm talking. So, six paramata practices. And among those six, we went kind of really,
all the details on those three paramatas, first three paramatas, which is generosity, morality,
and of course, sorry, the patient paramatas. Those three are we went. We went one after another.
And again, as I said, earlier in the teaching of the Buddha, all these paramatas are totally
connected. One after another, they're not different at all. They're all connected. The first one is
connected to the second one. The second one is connected to the third, third, and fourth. I mean,
all connected line. And also, for example, the second paramata is more profound than the first
one. And third paramata is more profound than the first and second. And fourth paramata is more
profound than the first and second and third. It goes on and on. I trust the Pandya paramatas,
Pandya paramata, all that. Because of how the greatest teacher, Buddha Shakyamuni, told that
"exhiling according to capability, readiness according to that." So he just gradually leading
us to the deeper meaning of the true nature and exploring the goodness of ours and benefiting
from all that, all the beings. This is also known as one of the skill means of the way to lead
practitioners to the path, to the enlightenment or path of enlightenment by the Buddha. Never
post, never burst, never burst according to readiness. But stay, stay fast, stay fast,
continue until goal is achieved, or discover, fulfill. So that is how that is. And that way,
now today, we are in the fourth paramata. I'm going to look at the fourth paramata.
Fourth paramata is joyful effort paramata. In English, that's what we're translating,
or at least I'm translating that way. Or another way, this fourth paramata is simple. It is effort,
effort paramata. I said it's effort. It's effort paramata. This effort paramata is,
in Sanskrit, named as bhriya. So as we went, all the other paramatas, the three paramatas,
so we go the whole meaning of the effort paramata, and the nature of the effort paramata,
and as well as division or the benefit of the effort paramatas. Paramatas are those ways.
And division of the paramatas, or the effort paramatas, those ways. So first is the whole
meaning of the paramatas. And as he said already, in Sanskrit, it is known as bhriya. And you all
know that bhriya paramatas. That which is translated into Tibet. Actually, those great
translators, emanated translators, or masters, and both Indian and Tibetan masters, or translators,
translated that into as sundru, bhriya as sundru. Sundru means continuation effort.
That is really the meaning of it. So this sundru is not just a one-day show or short-time show,
but it is a continuation. The nature of this effort, then it comes joy. Joyful. Joyful effort
continuation.
It's not boring. It's not tiring. It's not just a desperate situation, but joyful effort.
Why? Because it is long last goal that we're going to achieve. Long last vision that we lost it
without regard. Regained back. What that means? We lost our goal, our ordinal goal, our ordinal
richness, our ordinal precious nature. By due to our mistakes of ignorance and duality, for a long
time we lost it. Really lost it. And that is our ordinal nature. We lost the midst of our own
creation of the dreamland. Creations. We were wondering that so many lifetimes, according to
the greatest teacher, for the biggest time, we are wondering on the nightmare of the dreams
that created by one's own. And wondering, wondering. We went ups and downs and not really went
anything higher than that. Just in samsara going up and up and down, up and up, down and down,
just all the time. And creating so much again delusions, so many the cause and the root and
the branches of the of the dualities and creating and that reflected bouncing back us exactly say
as a like nightmare. We went through that so many times, so long time, thinking we are doing
something but we just almost come what's called struggling to come out of them or come out of the
nightmare yet we couldn't fulfill. We completely lost our point and look in the wrong directions.
We've been there. And to now by the teaching of the greatest teacher, kindness, compassion teacher,
wise and versatile teacher taught the clay path, clay technique, how to regain back
the long lost our beautiful nature richness. To discover this, we need long lost
courage, commitment and your combined target continuation. That is really known as the
joyful effort. Joyful effort in the teaching said very famous Buddha sattara teaching known as
lord yamsu huba sattaras, sattara that caused by the lord yamsu, bodhisattva lord yamsu.
In that teaching said, say if you don't have or we don't have the joyful effort,
no matter how much all the parameters we have is not going to bring the fulfillment.
The fulfillment of the all the other parameters absolutely depended upon the joyful effort.
If we don't have the joyful effort, that means we're not going to improve at all.
That means we're not going to benefit to any ones. That means include one's own self.
Don't measure the others. If we don't have the joyful effort, we're not going to get enlightenment.
But at all, therefore absolutely enlightenment is best upon the joyful effort. Or this joyful
effort.
Joyful effort, joyful effort so so important. It's just crucial. It's a force, moving force.
As I said, patient paramata is like bad bombs. Joyful, it's like moving force with the muscle.
Muscle. If you have just only the skill of alone, it's not going to work.
But when we have the joyful effort, then we have that the generous paramata is moving forward.
Morality paramata is improving and the passion will be steady and then effort will track.
Truly that truly that will take us to other shows with all the other gratitude paramatas
which is concentration paramata and western paramatas. So this joyful effort is in the
teaching said as we mentioned too many times. It's joyful and is vital or in the polls
to perform all the paramatas. And therefore it's called support of all the paramatas.
Joyful effort is the moving force of a generous paramata. Joyful effort is the moving force of
the morality paramata. Joyful effort paramata is the kind of steady moving, stabilizing the
patient paramata and as well as concentration paramata and western paramata. It's really
so so important, so special, so powerful. And this is again why we don't have joyful effort.
Because of the laziness. That is laziness. It's struggle. When we are under the control of
laziness, nothing is going to improve. That we know in samsara. Even samsara activities,
we don't have the effort. And generally in the Buddha's teaching, we have the effort and the joy
of the samsara activity. That is not considered as the joyful paramata. Joyful effort paramata.
Samsara activity of joyful is in the Buddha teaching. I will talk later. It comes later.
It's a form of laziness. Excited with the kind of like activities of the
sargulas, samsara activity. Many times, of course, we think it's effort. It's true effort. But it's
not what we're talking about in the Buddha's teaching. Paramata, joyful effort. It's opposite.
Opposite effort. So anyway, again, whatever it is with the laziness, it comes. Then it completely
overpowers. It slows down everything. Nothing is going to move. Move. It's like tropical depression
.
Standing in the low levels, there's no wind. It stays. It's just pounding. Whatever the weather
is, it's just pounding right above us. That means pounding the storm of the duality.
The nightmare is really pounding us. There's no wind. Opposite effort is moving there.
You just can create more and more. That is what it is. Therefore, even in teachings,
even you have the good wisdoms. Wisdoms, if you don't have the joyful effort, that's not going to
happen. Now, no matter what you are, the great master Jumu Gomparsehi in his teachings,
for example, there is a boat, there is a sailor, sailor in a boat,
and everything is ready. But if you don't have the what do you call it? Rolling.
Rolls. If you don't have the oars, that's nothing. It just doesn't matter. If there is a sailor,
there is a boat, it's nothing. It's all. It's joyful effort, it's all. And it stops.
It stops. And there is again, if you have the skills and the method of relatedness,
it really won't drop anything. There are stories. I tell the stories. Stories, I'm sure,
maybe it's a similar story in the West, too. And it's the ancient stories. Ancient times,
in one area, there is, of course, many things. But there, in that area, there is one rabbit
and one total stay. And they stay, they both stay in the same area. They're kind of happy
and excited with that. And then one time, there's discussions. Discussions.
And they say, "Who owns these mountains? Who owns this?" I think the
pro or the rabbit said, one of those said, "I own this rabbit. I've been loner than you."
And others said, "Also, I've been here too long time. I own this mountain. I own."
So they both had, they both are friends, but they both started kind of talking that way.
So they said, "Okay, now, then with the rabbit, sorry, the frog pointed to the rabbit. Okay,
then, if that's the case, we're going to recapture our ownership of the mountain.
Therefore, whoever, God, is taught this mountain, mountain, tomorrow at the dawn,
when the sun hits on the mountain, whoever is able to come up there at that time,
that will own the mountain." When frog initiated that purpose, or when he proposed that idea,
rabbit immediately thought, "Wow, that is just a piece of cake. I can get this so fast.
How truly, I will be winner. I will be winner." So, rabbit got so much confidence, so much
confidence.
And so, then they decided that, "Tomorrow, whoever gets in the wrap right on top of the mountain,
whenever the sun hits at the mountain, then that time they're going to say, 'Oh, I'm here.' Whoever
ask that, so then others are just don't get there. I mean, whoever can get post, they're going to
announce that I'm here." So that's what they made the decisions. So now, rabbit was very happy and
excited. I will be there, up there in the mountain, top of the mountain, and he just said, "
Whatever
you do, in many days, I will be up there whenever I'm short of twice." And frog thought, and
thought,
"Now I said already that statement, and if I don't make my effort, I won't be up there,
and I will be losing. Therefore, I will start my journey right now." So that night, frog started
the journey, and he climbed up and climbed up all the way there. And now, the sun is almost coming
out, and the rabbit falls asleep. He woke up so quickly, and he remembered those statements.
He ran, and the mountain closed again, and the rabbit on top of the mountain, frog said,
"I'm here already." He announced, he was the winner. So why that happened? Because
the joyful effort determined off of the frog, who was the top of the mountain when dawn is,
and the rabbit fell asleep. Laziness of the sleep completely prevented his ownership
of the mountain. So that is one of the stories. Stories. Wow, what is really that? Even you have
that. And there are so many beautiful stories, one after another really, so many stories.
Ancient times, again, these are stories. There are two beautiful friends. Both are young,
and one is a very wealthy boy, and the other is very poor, but they become really good friends.
But others, the wealthy people, it's quite good-looking. At the same time, he was very smart,
and the poor people is, that person is not so smart. But they both went to school,
school, and everybody is honoring that, the wealthy boy, wealthy boy because he belongs to
wealthy families. Even though he's really not studying, even though he's good wisdom,
but he's not studying. Studying, but everybody is honoring him. He's, "Oh, you got this and that."
They're going to make all those different stories. But these poor people, poor boys did not get any
acknowledges. Even though he's studying so well, he knows so well. So well, but to say he's a
little
bit kind of like, not so smart as like that, that rich boy. So because of his poor family,
not acknowledging it at all, in a way. But then they started continuing, and they see,
now the poor people is really getting so smart and so expert, so expert on what they're studying,
become very knowledgeable and understandable. And even the taste when they give, they kind of,
always those teachers or workers are kind of really supportive that rich boys, not, but however,
there's a head of the master, realize that there's something going on, there's something wrong
going
on. And that is not correct, because he's so, that his poor boy, the poor family is really so
educated. He was so strong, even though maybe he's not, not so smart, but he's now because his
continuation effort, he becomes strong. So then it openly, this head master give them test,
test to all of them. And when they give them, among all the students, this poor boy become
the first, he got a plus, a plus. And this, the rich people, boy from the rich family,
he got just what's called third degrees, third levels. So that is because his effort, his effort,
continuation, he started. So therefore, this is really, if you don't have the effort, no matter
whatever, how much smart you are, it's not going to fulfill the goal, goal, what we're looking at.
So therefore, this joyful effort is so, so important, so special, so, so beautiful. Now the
benefit of this joyful effort, and it was saved, it has all those benefits as in the great teaching
of the Sutraalaykara. Sutraalaykara, or the ornament of the Sutra, by teaching of the great master
Asenga, or the Maite, the future Buddha Maite, is called, there's five trees, three trees of five
famous books of the, of the Maite teaching, and which is born and taught by the Asenga, the great
Indian master Asenga taught, among them, no, this one is known as the, was the Sutraalaykara,
or an intuitive though the G. In that teaching, said that each of those parameters has four powers,
and they are, only the one is different, but the rest is quite similar. And I mentioned earlier too
,
all the last three parameters. I mentioned that about, about, about this four point with the
generous parameter, and morality parameter, and patient parameter, and again, I will talk that
again, just say, I mean, list the names, there's nothing much to say. The fourth one is, this each
parameter, when you bring that qualities into action, it will immediately dispel the opposite,
opposite. So what that will do? What is that joyful effort? Movement will bring the joyful effort
in an active status, it will dispel the opposite of joyful effort. Opposite of joyful effort is
laziness. That will be dispelled, dispelled. When the laziness is dispelled, then what it brings?
Then it is continually procured status, then it will bring realization of the emptiness,
second is realization of the emptiness, pretty from the subject, object, and activities, also
polluted, pretty from the grasping of the dualities, or clingings, that. Then third benefit of that
,
when that happened, then your love and your completely motivated has grown so strongly, so
beautifully.
Therefore, it will fulfill the wishes of others. It will fulfill the wishes, third benefit.
It is the same as like other parameters. It will fulfill the wishes of others, and yours too.
The dual purpose will be now on the fulfilling process. And the fourth benefit, because of our
bodhisattva, all the bodhisattva activities, it will also inspire the other practice, other
individuals who are connected to this, your paramata practices. It will inspire their designated,
connected to the path. That means, connected to the path of their, connected to the path of the
shravokayana, partic bodhayana, and bodhisattva yanas. And then it brings their final hope,
realization, finally. Final hope is aha-tahul, and as well as bodhahul, it will break. So those are
known as the whole benefit of these, those parabria parameter or joyful effort parameters.
So that is. Now we go back to the division of joyful effort. Division of joyful effort is,
is known as the first is, is, ah, maybe I just roughly translated this now. It was in my English.
Roughly translation is, is amore-like parameters, amo, a-r-m-o-u-r, I believe, amore-like
parameters.
And, sorry, amore-like joyful effort, amore-like joyful effort. And the second is,
is continuation, the continuation joyful effort parameter.
And then third one is joyful effort, effort never stopping, never stopping, stopping joyful effort.
Those are the three parameters, oh sorry, three joyful effort parameters. Those are three.
The fourth one, I say amore-like parameters, amore-like, also is known as the, the,
just discouragement, not having the discouragement, not having the discouragement, amore-like
parameters.
Now that means not discouragement. That means confidence, commitment, or the determination.
That means you have more patient, more tolerance, more strongman, but then it's continuation.
And the second is, is, and continue, johra-mako, never pulsing, or never stopping, never stopping,
stopping, continuation, joyful effort, as like river, as like river, continually flowing, flowing.
And the third one is, again, I'm making more details of that. Third one is, never says enough
to do the good things, never stopping, never say it's enough, and the good things, what better
means practices of the parameters. I'm not going to say oh it's enough, my generous practices,
it's enough my morality practices, it's enough my passion practices, it's enough my concentration
practices, never going to say, it's never that. All I'm not going to say, never going to say,
is enough my starting of the teachings, never going to say, contemplate on the teachings,
never going to say, it's always enough my meditation practices, continue with that,
and to get the vision. So those are known as three divisions of parameters,
or Briya parameter, joyful effort parameters. Then I will just list three names, but opposite of
this
joyful effort, this as I already said, and you all know that today, it's laziness, laziness.
This is laziness, there's three laziness, highlighted by the gracious teacher,
Buddha saktaman, three laziness. The sloppy laziness,
pale, sloppy laziness, self-blaming laziness, laziness of the old habit patterns
that has no benefits to you, or to oneself, to the others. Those are known as three lazinesses.
So that is what really about the laziness, laziness, and also really about the joyful effort
talks, joyful effort parameter talks for today, and now I'm going to start here, here for today,
and then thank you very much again for participating, and really participating in practicing.
Thank you again, thank you so much, thank you, thank you, and now we do the
very short meditation, and then we're going to do the peeling practices.